---
title: "Bricks"
week: 13
---

Here's where we've left off: <https://jsfiddle.net/atesgoral/x75ut61o/382/>
{: .panel .snapshot }

This week we'll learn about arrays, objects and add bricks to our game.

So far, all the variables we've used hold single values, like the x coordinate of the paddle, the game state, etc.

You can store lists of values in variables using arrays. Here's an example of an array of numbers:

```js
var someEvenNumbers = [ 2, 6, 10 ];
```

Notice the square brackets surrounding a comma-delimited values. That's an *array literal* in JavaScript.

Here's another example of an array. This time, an array of strings instead of numbers:

```js
var cities = [ 'Toronto', 'Ottawa', 'Vancouver' ];
```

You can read and write values on certain indices (positions) in an array using square brackets. For example, `cities[1]` gives us the string `'Ottawa'` since it's the second item in the array, with index 1. Array indices start at 0. You can change the value of a slot in an array like this: `cities[1] = 'Tokyo'`.

Another type of value for storing values more complex than a single value like a number or a string (called a *primitive* value) is an object. We've been using objects already. The canvas (the value of the `c` variable) and the 2D rendering context (the value of the `ctx` variable) are objects. Objects have properties. Properties are like other variables attached to an object, like buds on a branch. We've already been using the `fillStyle` property of the context object to change the fill colour.

Here's an example of an object:

```js
var cat = { age: 4, kind: 'tabby' };
```

Also, in JavaScript, arrays are objects themselves, and therefore have properties of their own. The `length` property of an array tells us the number of items that are currently in the array.

Coming back to our game, here's a brick object:

```js
var brick = { x: 10, y: 20, color: 'red' };
```

It has the properties: `x`, `y`, and `color`. This object represents a single brick that we could draw on the canvas using it's x and y coordinate and colour.

We'll have multiple bricks to draw. Instead of defining multiple variables like `brick1`, `brick2`, etc. for the bricks, we can use an array. Here's an empty array to hold our bricks:

```js
var bricks = [];
```

Add that line of code where we define the `frameCount` variable.

Next, let's define a new function for adding new bricks to this array:

```js
function addBrick(x, y, color) {
  bricks.push({ x: x, y: y, color: color });
}
```

This function takes the x and y coordinates and colour of a brick, and add a new brick object to the `bricks` array. The `push` method of an array appends a new item at the end.

Next, let's add some bricks:

```js
addBrick(0, 0, 'red');
addBrick(52, 0, 'magenta');
addBrick(104, 0, 'blue');
addBrick(0, 17, 'magenta');
addBrick(52, 17, 'blue');
addBrick(104, 17, 'cyan');
```

Add these lines before the `paint` function.

Now, we need to start rendering these bricks. First, let's define how large we want the bricks to be:

```js
var BRICK_WIDTH = 50;
var BRICK_HEIGHT = 15;
```

Add these lines where we have all the other game settings like `BALL_RADIUS`.

In the `paint` function, we're going to loop over all the items in the `bricks` array and render each brick:

```js
  for (var i = 0; i < bricks.length; i++) {
    var brick = bricks[i];

    ctx.fillStyle = brick.color;
    ctx.fillRect(
      brick.x,
      brick.y,
      BRICK_WIDTH,
      BRICK_HEIGHT
    );
  }
```

Add these lines right after we clear the canvas using the `ctx.fillRect(0, 0, c.width, c.height);`.

Here's where we've gotten: <https://jsfiddle.net/atesgoral/x75ut61o/580/>
{: .panel .snapshot }
